Philip C. Almond
Henry 2008 — Henry J. h e Fragmentation of Renaissance Occultism and the
Decline of Magic // History of Science, 46 (2008).
Heppe 1880 — Heppe H. (ed.) Soldan’s Geschichte der Hexenprozesse. Stuttgart, 1880.
Hunter 2005 — Hunter M. New Light on the “Drummer of Tedworth”: Conl icting
Narratives of Witchcrat in Restoration England // Historical Research, 78 (2005).
Hutchinson 118 — Hutchinson F. An Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft. London, 1718.
Jobe 1981 — Jobe T.H. h e Devil in Restoration Science: h e Glanvill-Webster
Witchcrat Debate // Isis, Vol. 72, No. 3 (1981).
Kors and Peters 2001 — Kors A.C. and Peters E. Witchcrat in Europe 400–1700:
A Documentary History. Philadelphia, 2001.
Lecky 1884 — Lecky William E.H. History of the Rise and Inl uence of the Spirit
of Rationalism in Europe. New York, 1884.
Lewis 2006 — Lewis R. Of “Origenian Platonisme”: Joseph Glanvill on the Pre-
existence of Souls // Huntington Library Quarterly, 69 (2006).
Lipsiensis 1713 — Lipsiensis Phileleutherus [Richard Bentley]. Remarks upon a Late
Discourse of Free-h inking. London, 1713.
More 1647 — More Henry. Philosophicall Poems. London, 1647
More 1659 — More Henry. h e Immortality of the Soul. London, 1659.
More 1662 — More Henry. h e Immortality of the Soul in A Collection of Several
Philosophical Writings. London, 1662.
More 1682 — More, Henry. Annotations upon the Two Foregoing Treatises, Lux
Orientalis… and the Discourse of Truth. London, 1682.
Notestein 1911 — Notestein W. History of Witchcrat in England from 1558 to 1718.
Washington, 1911.
Parsons 1966 — Parsons C.O. (ed.) Saducismus Triumphatus. Gainsville. Florida, 1966.
Prior 1932 — Prior M.E. Joseph Glanvill, Witchcrat , and Seventeenth-Century
Science // Modern Philology, 30 (1932).
Saler 2006 — Saler M. Modernity and Enchantment: A Historical Review // h e
American Historical Review, 111 (2006).
Scot 1584 — Scot Reginald. h e Discoverie of Witchcrat . London, 1584.
Shaw 2006 — Shaw J. Miracles in Enlightenment England. New Haven and London:
Yale University Press, 2006.
Walker 1981 — Walker D.P. Unclean Spirits: Possession and Exorcism in France and
England in the Late Sixteenth and Early Seventeenth Centuries. Philadelphia, 1981.
Walker 1988  — Walker D.P. h e Cessation of Miracles  // Merkel I. and De-
bus A.G. Hermeticism and the Renaissance: Intellectual History and the
Occult in Early Modern Europe. Washington, 1988.
White 1905 — White A.D. A History of the Warfare of Science with h eology in
Christendom. New York, 1905.
Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse
Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu
in Islamic Astral Sciences
демонология
как
семиотическая
система
№ 5
mbra

## IN

h e soul that has acquired true knowledge is said to shake of the body at er
casting of all evil … like the moon becoming free from the mouth of Rāhu.
Chāndogya Upanisads 8.131
Some say that Râhu is, forsooth, a demon’s head, which, albeit severed from
the trunk, yet, by virtue of having tasted of [the] nectar [of immortality],
has continued alive and become a Graha (i.e. ‘seizer,’ or ‘planet’) … Others
declare Râhu to have a body, consisting only of head and tail, the i gure
of a snake [nāga]. Others again tell us that the so-called son of Sinhikâ is
uncorporeal and opacous!
Bṛhatsaṁhitā 5.1–32
h e head of the Dragon is called râhu, the tail ketu.
h e Hindus seldom speak of the tail, they only use the head.
In general, all comets which appear on heaven are called ketu.
al-Bīrūnī, Kitāb fī Taḥqīq mā li-l-Hind3

## Varâhamihira [Bṛhatsaṁhitā 3.7–12] says:

“h e Head [i.e. Rāhu] has thirty-three sons called tâmasakîlaka [‘dark
shat s’]. h ey are the dif erent kinds of comets, there being no dif erence
whether the head extends away from them or not. h eir prognostics
corresponds to their shapes, colours, sizes, and positions.”
al-Bīrūnī, Kitāb fī Taḥqīq mā li-l-Hind4
[Kane 1958: 569].
[Varā hamihira 1870: 455; cf. Gail 1980: 134–135].
[al-Bīrūnī 1887: 234].
Idem.

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences

## T

he detailed treatment of Rāhu in the
great compilation of the sixth-century
Indian astronomer Varāhamihira (505–587 CE), known as Bṛhatsa-
ṁhitā, rel ects the diverse contemporary mythological conceptions of
the eclipse-causing demon. h e giant demon and personii ed eclipse is
not only used as a metaphor for the shadow ef ect of the earth at the
lunar eclipse and for the shadow ef ect of the moon at the solar eclipse
[Gail 1980: 135]. Varāhamihira also notes thirty-three of spring called
tāmasakīlaka [Varā hamihira 1947: 24–26] of the so-called son of
Siṁhikā, the wife of the demon Vipracitti (Bhagavatapurāṇa 6.6.37),
which is recorded in the important Kitāb al-Tah īm li-awāҴil ṣināҵat
al-tanjīm (“Book of Instruction in the Elements of the Art of Astrol-
ogy”) written by the renowned tenth-century Muslim astronomer and
cultural historian Abū ގl-Rayতān Muতammad ibn Aতmad al-Bīrūnī.
In like manner, the nature of the ai liated planetary deity Ketu was
conceptualised. Of signii cance is the original meaning of the Sanskrit
word ketu denoting “light,” “clarity”5, a term that is synonymous with
the etymologically-related adjective citra of the Pahlavī gōchihr which
Islamic astronomy applied to luminous phenomena such as meteors or
comets. At the same time this appears to be an apparent contradistinc-
tion to the light-devouring function of Ketu as eclipse demon. In what
follows, we will establish the material identity between Rāhu and the
Persian gōchihr called al-jawzahar or al-tinnīn in Arabic derived from
the same etymon as Rāhu’s alter ego Ketu and seek to uncover traces of
this apparent inconsistency.
h e ancient practice of astrology, the interpretation of the move-
ment of the stars in the sky as rel ecting divine powers and enabling
prognostication of the future, had a deep and pervasive inl uence on
early and medieval Islamic thought and culture6. h e history of astrol-
For the development of the meanings of ketu, see [Hartner 1938: 152–153;
Billard 1971: 125; Gail 1980: 138].
h e ޏAbbāsid caliphs, in particular al-Manৢūr, accorded particular promi-
nence to the study and practical application of astrology [Gutas 1998: 16,
n. 7, p. 33].
ogy, which had been introduced into the Iranianised world of Cen-
tral Asia through Graeco-Babylonian inl uence, goes back to ancient
times. Moreover, with the spread of Buddhism into Central Asia,
Iran and China, Indian nakṣatra (lunar asterism) astrology was in-
troduced7.
Later Parthian (250 BCE–224 CE) and Sasanian (224–651 CE)
kings are recorded to have maintained a  “chief of the star-gazers”
(axtarmārānsālār) at court where a regnal horoscope would be drawn
up for each king. However, only during the reign of the Sasanian King
Shāpūr I (r. 241–271) was the study of Iranian astronomy and astrolo-
gy known to have been encouraged. According to the Dēnkard (Book
IV), the ninth-century compendium of the Zoroastrian religion (which
epitomises orally transmitted knowledge of the priests of the time and
so comprises material that reaches far back into the history of Zoroas-
trianism), the king is noted to have gathered the astrological writings
h e Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, which contains an exposition of the system
of the twenty-eight nakṣatras or lunar mansions, was widely dif used
[Gutas 1998: 240–241] and summarised in Chinese by the Parthian
prince An Shih-kao in the second century AD [Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna of
the Divyāvadāna: 213–217]; on An Shih-kao, see [Zürcher 1959, vol. 1:
32–34; cited at er Pingree 1963: 240–241] fully translated twice in the
third century AD (Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, trans. [Ṿiś vabharati 1954:
xii–xiii], cited at er [Pingree 1963: 240–241]). A fragment of a Sanskrit
text written in about 500 AD was among the Weber manuscripts found
south of Yarkand [Hoernle 1894: 1–40; cited at er Pingree 1963: 241
and n. 90] fragments of i t h-century birch-bark manuscripts of the
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārajñī, which also deals with nakṣatra astrology, are
preserved among the Bower and Petrovski manuscripts discovered near
Kashgar in 1889 [Hoernle 1893–1912, pts. 6–7: 222–240 and pl. xlix–
liv; and Levi 1915: 19–138; cited at er Pingree 1963: 241 and n. 91]. Ac-
cording to Pingree [1963: 241] the texts most probably passed through
Buddhist communities in the eastern provinces of the Sasanian Empire to
reach these regions; moreover, one i nds the remains of this Buddhist in-
l uence in the second chapter of the Bundahishn (Bundahishn 2.2), where
the twenty-eight nakṣatras are listed with Persian names [Sacred Books of
the East: 11; Henning 1942: 229–248].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
“which were dispersed throughout India, the Byzantine Empire and
other lands”8. During the last centuries of Sasanian rule the inl u-
ence of the sciences of astronomy/astrology, which were ot en a syn-
thesis of Indian and Hellenistic theories, was particularly pervasive.
Abū ގl-Rayতān Muতammad ibn Aতmad al-Bīrūnī (l . c. 390/1000 —
440/1050) mentions Khusraw I Anūshirwān (r. 531–579) as another
Sasanian ruler who encouraged Greek or Graeco-Syrian and Indian
scholars in Iran [Kennedy 1956: 130]. According to a tradition report-
ed by the great poet Abu ގl-Qāsim Firdawsī of ৫ūs (c. 329–330/940–
941 — c. 411/1020 or 416/1025), author of the monumental versii ed
epic, known as the Shāh-nāma, the colossal throne (taq-i taqdis) of his
grandson, the last Sasanian king Khusraw II Parwīz (r. 590–628), was
embellished with images of the seven regions as well as the seven plan-
ets and the twelve signs of the zodiac9. As the centre of the astrological
throne the ruler represented the one who held the power to inl uence
the stars [Herzfeld 1920: 1–24, 103–147]. As a logical consequence
political crises were regarded as inevitable at acute aspects of the con-
stellations10.
Sanskrit astrological works were popular in the Iranian world. h e
early Islamic astrologers included numerous Indian theories into their
works, most of which must have reached them through Middle Per-
sian, or Pahlavi texts [Pingree 1963: 242]. To this were added the di-
rect translations from Sanskrit into Arabic during the early ޏAbbāsid
caliphate that had come to power in 132/750. It soon established itself
in the new centrally planned capital of Baghdad, Madīnat al-salām,
[Zaehner 1955. Repr. ed. 1972: 8; Pingree 1963: 241; Gutas 1998: 36, see
also 41].
[Mohl 1838–1878, vol. 6: 253]. Comparable imagery is reported second-
hand from h eophanes through Kedrenos that in Ganzaca (Ganjak) when
Heraclius captured Khusraw’s palace in 624, he saw Khusraw’s image in the
domed roof of the palace, as though enthroned in heaven and surrounded by
the sun, moon and stars. Texts cited in full in [Herzfeld 1920: 1–3; L’Orange
1953: 18–27, esp. pp. 19–21. Cf. also: Carter 1974: 177, n. 25].
On court astrologers, cf. [Christensen 1944: 396]; on horoscopes, see
[Kennedy and Pingree 1971: vi; Russell 2004: 85, n. 11].
(“h e City of Peace”) drawn from the Qurގānic expression dār al-
salām (Qurގān 6.127; 10.26) referring to Paradise. h e ޏAbbāsid peri-
od saw an unprecedented level of activity in the sciences of astronomy/
astrology. Middle Persian astronomy/astrology was largely mediated
through astronomers/astrologers of Iranian and Indian origin at the
ޏAbbāsid court11, such as Māshāގallāh ibn Atharī (an Iranian Jew who
may have converted to Islam), Abū Sahl al-Faḍl ibn Nawbakht (who
had converted from Zoroastrianism to Islam), Abū ণafৢ ޏUmar ibn
al-Farrukhān al-৫abarī and Kankah al-Hindī12. h ese activities had
a profound ef ect on social attitudes (Cf. [Gutas 1998: 108–110]). In-
deed astronomy was viewed by scholars as the “mistress of all science”
[Ullmann 1972: 277, n. 5].
h e works of many early Islamic astronomers/astrologers incor-
porated numerous Indian astronomical/astrological theories. Islamic
scholars moreover came in direct contact with Indian astronomy/as-
trology at er the conquests of Sind and Afghanistan and through an
embassy from Sind that arrived at the court of the second ޏAbbāsid ca-
liph al-Manৢūr (r. 136/754 — 158/775) in Baghdad circa 155/77713.
Al-Manৢūr ordered his astronomers to translate a Sanskrit text into
Arabic with the assistance of a  member of the embassy who was
learned in astronomy. h e work came to be known in Arabic as the Zīj
al-Sindhind al-kabīr and is based on a text called the Mahāsiddhānta,
whose own source is purportedly a work of the inl uential Brahmagup-
ta (b. 598)14.
h e avid translations of Indian astronomy necessary for astrological tech-
niques among the earliest ޏAbbāsid caliphs and their supporters may not
only have been carried out in emulation of the activities at the Chinese
Tang capital Chang’an (“Eternal Peace”) to lay a solid foundation of the
new-born dynasty but were part of a widespread culture of Indian learn-
ing, as recently propounded by Van Blandel [Van Blandel 2015: 257–294,
esp. 286–287].
On Kankah al-Hindī, see [Pingree 1970: 17].
[Pingree 1963: 242–4]. Ragep, F. Jamil, “Astronomy” [EI3, 2012].
Ragep, F. Jamil, “Astronomy” [EI3, 2012. Cf. Van Blandel 2015: 257–294,
esp. 285–286].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
One of the most important scholars who transmitted Indo-Ira-
nian astrology is the ninth-century astrologer Abū Maޏshar Jaޏfar ibn
Muতammad ibn ޏUmar (d. 272/886) from Balkh, known in the West
as Albumasar. In his Zīj al-hazārāt (“h e Zij of the h ousands”) he
combines Hindu, Sasanian and Hellenistic astronomical/astrological
traditions, claiming to have used an ancient Iranian text from ante-
diluvian times written during the reign of Țahmūrath (Av. Takhma
Urupi), the second king of the Pīshdādian dynasty of legendary epic
Iranian history15. However, as Pingree has shown, the so-called h ou-
sands of the Iranians is “really an eclectic Indian system” [Pingree
1963: 244]. Ibn al-Nadīm quotes passages from the court astrologer
Abū Maޏshar’s Kitāb ikhtilāf al-zījāt (“h e Book on the Variations
among zījs”), which contain calculations determining the movement

## of the planets:

h e people of the time of Tahmurath and the more ancient
Persians called these the “cycles of the thousands”; and the
wise men of India and their kings, the ancient kings of Persia,
and even the ancient Chaldeans who lived in Babylon deter-
mined the mean longitudes of the seven planets by means of
them, preferring them over others because of their accuracy
and brevity16.
In fact, both sciences, astronomy (ҵilm al-hayҴa, the “science of the
i gure (of the heavens)” or ҵilm al-falak, the “science of the spheres”)
and astrology (ҵilm al-nujūm, “science of the stars”), were for a long
time so close that the word munajjim was used to designate both as-
h e legendary history of king Țahmūrath is recorded, for instance, by al-
h aޏālibī in his Taގrīkh Ghurar al-siyar (trans. and ed. [Zotenberg 1900:
7–10]) in which he describes the king’s subjugation of Iblīs demonstrated
by his using Iblīs as mount to perambulate the world. Cf. [Pingree 1963:
243–244; Pingree 1968: 3–4, n. 3]. h e culture hero Takhma Urupi rid-
ing Angra Mainyu as his horse from one end of the earth to the other is
mentioned twice in the Avesta [Yasht 15.11–2, 19.28–9].
Fihirist, Cairo, n.d.: 348–350, cited at er [Pingree 1968: 3–4].
trologer and astronomer17. h is is based on the fact that, according
to the eighthor ninth-century alchemical author Jābir ibn ণayyān
(known to the Latins as Geber)18, one of the main representatives of

## earlier Arabic alchemy:

h e astrologer must be a mathematician; he must have mas-
tery of astronomy, this is a part of ޏilm al-nujūm (the “science
of the stars” or astrology). For ޏilm al-hayގa (astronomy) is the
description of the situation of the state of the sky and what it
contains (ৢūrat waḍޏ al-falak wa-mā fīhi), whereas astrology is
the “git of the planets (ҵaṭāҴ al-kawākib)”19.
Astrology, which involves calculating the position of the planets
and the mathematical production of horoscopes, is ot en referred to as
judicial astrology (ҵilm aḥkām al-hayҴa, the “science of the judgment of
the stars”) [Savage-Smith 2004: xxxvii]. Astrological predictions con-
sisted not only of determining the fate of an individual (mawālīd, “ge-
nethlialogy,” or horoscopic astrology) and of hemerology (ikhtiyārāt,
“choices”), but also of the application of continuous horoscopes for
determining the course of events for a country or dynasty or to answer
specii c questions (masāҴil, “interrogations”)20.
h e idea that eclipses of the Sun and the Moon were caused by
the interference of an eclipse demon was widely held throughout the
Eurasian continent and can be traced back to remote antiquity21. h e
fearful monster, which quenched the light of the supreme luminaries
by seizing them in its jaws, was generally conceived as a giant serpent
or dragon, an iconography thought to be of oriental origin22. Its func-
Fahd, “Munadjdjim” [EI2 VII, 557b].
On Jābir ibn ণayyān, see [Sezgin 1971: 132–269].
Ibid.
20 Fahd, “Nudjūm, Aতkām al-” [EI2 VIII, 105b; Savage-Smith 2004: xxxvii;
Saliba 1992: 56–63].
Hartner, “Al-Djawzahar or al-Djawzahr” [EI2 II, 501b].
22 In ancient Babylon “the 28th of the month was a day of lamentations
when prayers of penitence were of ered, because the moon had disap-

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
tion was thus seen to be that of threatening and “devouring,” as well
as “delivering” and protecting the great luminaries at certain irregular
intervals23.
A number of theories arose to explain the dragon’s role in the
phenomena of solar and lunar eclipses and lunar waxing and waning.

## Khāleqī-Mo৬laq of ers the following summary:

“...a dragon comes up from hell every month on the eastern
side of the sky and swallows a piece of the moon’s disc every
night until the night comes when no part of the moon can be
seen. h en the moon-god kills the dragon from inside its belly
and triumphantly re-emerges. In later times, however, the sun
took over the moon’s role in the celestial combats, and it was
the sun which slew the dragon and rescued the moon from the
dragon’s belly twelve times every year”24.
h e idea that these phenomena were caused by a body whose head
and tail intercept the Sun’s and the Moon’s light was probably related
to the emergence of dei nite ideas as to the nature of the orbits of the
Sun and the Moon and their opposite points of intersection between
the Moon’s orbit and the ecliptic [Khareghat 1914: 129]. h e classical
theory of the dragon myth seems to have been modii ed in accordance
with developments in astrological doctrine at least from late Arsacid
and Sasanian times onwards. Sasanian astrologers received from India
the notion of Rahū, a celestial serpent whose head (siras) and tail (ketu)
peared from view and was to remain hidden for a few days in the power
of the dragon” [Green 1992: 29; Hartner 1938: 132, n. 24]. h e “Chal-
deans” considered the dragon to have been created even before the con-
stellations and the planets, and guarding over the universe with its head
towards the sunrise and its tail to the sunset [MacKenzie 1964: 525, and
Idem, “Gōzihr”: EIr].
[Hartner 1938: 131]. See also the Babylonian Talmudic tract Avodah
Zarah (“Mishna on Idolatry,” VIII a) in which the dragon is portrayed as
devouring the sun. Cf. [Epstein, 1997: 76].
24 Khāleqī-Mo৬laq, “Aždahā II. In Persian Literature” [EIr].
cause eclipses25. In Pahlavī Rahū was referred to as Gōchihr, his head
sar, and his tail dumb; in Arabic, the latter were respectively called ra’s
and dhanab [Pingree 2006: 240].
h e serpent-dragon accrued a range of negative aspects following
changes brought about by the rise of Zoroastrian cosmological dualism
according to which the contents of the world were made and arranged
by two primordial entities, the one good, causing light and life, and
the other bad, causing darkness and death. Astrology of ered support
for Zoroastrian apocalyptic ideas according to which the planetary
bodies were regarded as evil; the “good” luminaries, the Sun and the
Moon, were removed from the category of the seven planets whose in-
trusion brought injustice into the world26. Consequently the Sun and
For an analysis of the origin of the concept of Rāhu, see [De Mallmann
1962: 81; Markel 1995: 55–64; Pingree 2006: 240]. In the second-millen-
nium-BCE ৙gveda (5.40.5, 6, 8, 9) Rāhu is known as a demonic being,
Svar-bhānu-, said to have pierced the Sun with darkness [Grii th 1892.
Repr. ed. 1963, vol. 2: 501–502]. In post-Vedic mythology Svar-bhānu
is equated and used as synonymous term for the eclipse-causing demon
Rāhu-; it is interesting to note that as a heavenly body Svar-bhānu- (per-
haps meaning “who has the ef ulgence of the sun” or “who is af ected by
the ef ulgence of the sun”) is larger than the sun and moon and revolves in
its orbit beneath both luminaries (Mahābhārata 4.13.40–42). Advanced
knowledge of periodical solar and lunar eclipses led to the belief in two de-
monic beings, the red Rāhuand the black Ketu-. See [Scherer 1953: 100–
101]. Representations of Rāhu in a narrative context begin to appear in
Indian art slightly earlier than his iconic portrayal as a member of the plan-
etary deities; one of the earliest known portrayals of Rāhu being in a relief
of the “Churning of the Ocean” carved over the facade of the doorway of
cave temple number nineteen at Udayagiri in the Vidisha district of Mad-
hya Pradesh, which probably dates from c. 430 to 450. h e planet is shown
as a large horrii c head with bulging eyes with a i erce, demonic expression
turned to the right, his hands probably cupped together with palms facing
upward in the gesture of scooping the elixir of immortality (on the legend,
see the discussion below) [Williams 1982: 87, pl. 117].
26 [Khareghat 1914: 129]. Brunner, “Astronomy and Astrology in the Sasan-
ian Period, s.v. Astrology and Astronomy in Iran” [EIr: 862–868].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
the Moon were substituted by two “demonic” opponents, the head
and tail of the dragon (Pahl. gōchihr which stems from the Avestan
gao chithra, “having the seed of cattle,” i.e., parent of the cattle (or, “the
ox”), or rather “having the sperma bovis,” that is regarded to be con-
centrated in the lunar sphere or even the moon herself, from where it
acts as a fecundator of terrestrial regions” [Hartner 1938: 153], which
is generally being used in the Avesta as epithet of the moon [Zaeh-
ner 1955. Repr. ed. 1972: 164, n. E; MacKenzie 1964: 515, n. 26])27.
According to the Bundahishn (“Book of Primal Creation”), a Pahlavī
commentary on an Avestan text, Gōchihr is portrayed in “the middle
of the sky, like a serpent; its head in Gemini (dō-pahikar) and its tail
in Centaurus (nēmasp), so that between its head and tail there were six

## constellations in all directions”28. It states that:

…when Gōchihr, the serpent in the heavenly sphere, will fall
from the summit of the Moon to the earth, and the earth will
suf er pain like unto the pain a sheep feels when the wolf rends
out its wool29.
h is description i nds a parallel in the story of the Indian Rāhu
whose severed head, “like a mountaintop, fell roaring down to the
ground, so that the earth was shaken as by an earthquake”30.
In contradistinction to the original meaning of gao chithra, the
light and fecundity attribute of the Moon, the dragon’s head (gōchihr
sar) and tail (gōchihr dumb) came to represent the demon of eclipses
that intercepts the light of the luminaries, the personii ed dark prin-
ciple and direct antagonist of the luminaries31. h is led to the concept
Bundahishn 5, A. 5: 52.12–53.1, cited at er Brunner, “Astronomy and
Astrology in the Sasanian Period” [EIr: 862–868]. Cf.: Hartner, “Al-
Djawzahar” [EI2 II: 501b].
28 Bundahishn 52.12 [Zaehner 1955. Repr. ed. 1972: 164, n. E, 416–7]. Cf.:
Skjarvo, “Aždahā I” [EIr]. Also [MacKenzie 1964: 515, 525].
Bundahishn 30.18, trans. [Zaehner 1956: 148].
30 [Zimmer 1936: 138, trans. Hartner 1938: 153].
[Hartner 1938: 153; cf.: Duchesne-Guillemin, 1990: 17–9].
of a polarity of good and evil throughout the cosmos; the eclipse de-
mon being referred to as Dark Sun (mihr ī tamīg) and Dark Moon
(māh ī tamīg), “dark” meaning “obscured,” and “eclipsed”32 alluding
to the mythological representation of the eclipses, attributed to two
black astral bodies known as Ketu and Rāhu in India. h us, accord-
ing to the Bundahishn, the serpent-like (mār homānāg) Gōchihr and
Mūshparīg, with tail (dumbōmand) and wings (parrwar), are said to
be the evil opponents of the stellar constellations and are therefore
bound to the Sun’s path to restrain their capacity to cause harm33. h e
Sasanian conceptualisation appears to be a rel ection of the Indian,
for, as Pingree points out, the Sūryasiddhānta, written between the
tenth and eleventh century CE, explains “the anomalies in planetary
motion by the activities of demons stationed at the sun, the apogees,
and the nodes, who pull the planets along by chords of wind”34. h e
expulsion of evil from the sky is manifested by the plunging to earth of
Gōchihr35, who sets the earth on i re and whose permanent body will
only be destroyed by resurrection36.
In the history of ancient Indian astronomy throughout the pre-
Siddhāntic period, only the imaginary invisible planet Rāhu (the
grahaḥa, “seizer”) was held “responsible” for causing eclipses by de-
Bundahishn 5.4: 49.13–15 and the late ninth-century catechism Shkand-
gumānīg wizār (“Doubt Dispelling Exposition”) 4.46, cited at er Brunner,
“Astronomy and Astrology in the Sasanian Period” [EIr].
“[h e sun’s opponent, the “tailed Mūsh Parīg”] is tied to the sun’s chariot
but occasionally becomes loose and does great harm”; Bundahishn 5.4, 5
A.6–7: 50.6–7, 53.1–5, and Shkand-gumānīg wizār 4.46, cited at er Brun-
ner, “Astronomy and Astrology in the Sasanian Period” [EIr]. Cf. [Zaeh-
ner 1955. Repr. ed. 1972: 164, n. E. MacKenzie 1964: 513, 516; Hartner
1938: 151].
34 Based on the plausible supposition that either an earlier version of the
Sūryasiddhānta or a  very similar text must have been translated into
Pahlavi, perhaps under Khosraw I [Pingree 1963: 242].
Bundahishn 34.17: 225.1–3, cited at er Brunner, “Astronomy and Astrol-
ogy in the Sasanian Period” [EIr].
36 Bundahishn 30.31, cited at er [Khareghat 1914: 128].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
vouring the Sun and the Moon [Santoro 2006: 547]. Ketu (the tail
of the dragon), also understood as a planet that generates comets
with its i ery tail, is i rst mentioned in the late Vedic-period text,
the Atharvaveda (19.9.8–10)37. Both Rāhu and Ketu appear in the
great epic Mahābhārata (1.5.15–7), in which the demon Rāhu al-
lied with the celestial gods in the struggle against the world serpent,
Ananta. At er the victorious event, he assumed a disguise and thus
succeeded in drinking from the most benei cial of substances, the
amṛta (literally “non-dying”; Av. haoma, Vedic Skt. soma)38 contain-
ing the miraculous herb of immortality. But the Sun and the Moon
having detected his deception denounced him to the gods, where-
upon Vishnu swit ly threw his wheel-like weapon (sudarśanacakra)
and severed Rāhu’s head. However, the drink had already produced
its ef ect so that his head and tail both survive, immortalised, as in-
dividual invisible planets and intransigent enemies of the luminous
heavenly bodies. As a consequence, the Sun and the Moon are peri-
odically — in symbolic terms — “swallowed” or “disappear in” the
vengeful monster that thus causes solar and lunar eclipses. h en, the
Sun or the Moon passes through the opening at the neck, ending
the eclipse39.
In the later, “scientii c” phase, when Indian notions were transmit-
ted to the Central Asian and Iranian world, the two parts of the eclipse
monster are identii ed with the nodes of the moon’s path which play
a crucial role in the eclipses40. At the beginning of celestial motion the
head, Rāhu, that is to say the ascending node of the Moon’s orbit upon
the ecliptic, was in Gemini and Ketu, the tail of the bisected monster,
in other words the descending lunar node, was in Sagittarius (al-qaws,
[Grii th 1895–96; repr. ed. 1968, vol. 2: p. 269]. See [Scherer 1953: 101–
103], for further names of Rāhu and Ketu, see esp. [Idem: 102–5. Cf. Mar-
kel 1995: 56, 65; Santoro 2006: 547].
For a brief resume on the discussion of the etymology of the term amṛta,
see [Long 1976: 181–182, n. 22. Cf. Janda 2010: 29, 55].
[Hartner 1938: 131], and “Al-Djawzahar or al-Djawzahr” [EI2 II, 501b].
40 Cf. [Hartner 1938: 131] and Hartner, “Al-Djawzahar or al-Djawzahr” [EI2
II, 501b].
literally “bow”), ot en represented as an armed centaur41. h e 180° ex-
tent of the dragon rel ects the fact that the nodes occupy diametrically
opposite points of the ecliptic. Hence the dragon’s body is conceived
as arched across the sky42.
h e demon Rāhu is well-known not only in the Brahmanic tradi-
tion, but also in Buddhism (cf. [Santoro 2006: 547]). In the Buddhist
Jātaka stories of the previous births of Gautama Buddha, which were fa-
miliar throughout the Central Asian region, repeated reference is made
to the Moon gripped between Rāhu’s jaws, or being liberated from the
latter [Idem]. h us, in the Gandhāra-Jātaka, the king of Gandhāra chose
to become an ascetic at er observing a lunar eclipse, explaining that:
Taking the moon’s orb seized by Rāhu as my theme I forsook
my great kingdom and took the religious life
because
h ere is the moon’s pure orb become dark by trouble from outside;
now this kingdom is a trouble to me: I will take the religious life
so that the kingdom does not make me dark as Rāhu does the
moon’s orb [Cowell 1895. Repr. ed. 2000: 222–223].
In the Buddhacarita Siddhārtha’s son is called Rāhula “with the
face of Rāhu’s adversary”43. It is of note that in some Pali texts the
Brunner, “Astronomy and Astrology in the Sasanian Period” [EIr, II: 867].
h e dragonhead projecting from the centaur’s tail represents the descend-
ing node’s exaltation in Sagittarius; however, although the latter is the
dragon’s “tail” (dhanab) and not its “head” (raҴs), and hence the representa-
tion of the “head” is an iconographic inconsistency, it has come to symbol-
ise the astrological association [Hartner 1973–74: 110].
42 Bundahishn 5.4: 49.13–15, cited at er Brunner, “Astronomy and Astrology
in the Sasanian Period” [EIr: 867].
43 [Johnston 1936. Repr. ed. 2004: 29. Cf.: Santoro 2006: 547]. h e concept is
evoked in yet another line: “Deliver Rahula from grief for his parent as the
full moon from eclipse by Rāhu”. See [Johnston 1936. Repr. ed. 2004: 129].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
demon Rāhu is said not to devour the Sun and the Moon, “but merely
to caress them with his hand”44. In the well-known story of the so-
called Candrasūtra (Pali Candimā-sutta, “Discourse on the Moon”)
the Buddha reprimands Rāhu and directs him to release the Moon at
once which Rāhu does because he realises that otherwise his head will
be split into seven pieces [Strong 1992: 156]. h e Buddha thus delivers
the Moon (that is the god dwelling in the Moon), who had appealed to
him for refuge, from Rāhu’s clutches [Waldschmidt 1970: 179–183].
h e contextual and conceptual metamorphoses of the motif thus at-
test to a mechanism of continuity of these essential thought systems
which governed the Central Asian world and beyond.
Yet even when the scientii c causes were clear, the mythological in-
terpretation of the phenomenon survives. h is syncretism was referred
to by Willy Hartner: “We might suppose that clear insight into the
physical causes of eclipses could have thrown mythological tradition
into the background. But this has not been the case. What we observe
is that mythological and astronomical elements contract an intimate
fusion. h e nodes of the moon’s orbit are simply identii ed with the
eclipse monster itself: with the Hindus, Rāhu becomes the ascending,
Ketu the descending node; with Persians and Arabs, the head and tail
of the Djawzahr play the same role” [Hartner 1938: 131].
In Islamic astronomy the Persian gōchihr which was called al-
jawzahar or al-tinnīn (also aždahā “the giant dragon”), was sometimes
represented as a bi-partite or double-headed dragon. It is the circum-
polar constellation Draco, “represented as a very long serpent with
many convolutions; it is coiled around the north pole of the ecliptic”
[al-Bīrūnī 1934: 71], sometimes metaphorically applied to the Milky
Way45. h e Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṅa (III.67) describes how the i rst
sacred waist band or girdle (ayyaṅga closely related to the Iranian
aiwiyaonghen that is worn by every devout Zoroastrian) was presented
44 Malalasekera, G.P., Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, 2 vols., 1938. Repr.
ed. 1974, vol. 2: 735–737, cited at er [Strong 1992: 156].
[MacKenzie 1964: 521–522, n. 53, 525]. Cf. h e Mystical and Visionary
Treatises of Suhrawardi, trans. [h ackston 1982: 113, n. 42].
to the sun god by the king of serpents, Vāsuki, and represented the
starry band of the Milky Way [Carter 1981: 80, n. 27].
Together with the acculturation of astronomical knowledge, as-
trological iconography emerged in the form of visual conceptualisa-
tions that were regularly featured in medieval imagery. h ese were em-
blematically transferred onto architectural sculpture as well as port-
able objects, in particular metalwork and ceramics. Astrological con-
siderations also had a profound bearing on the artistic conventions of
the iconography of the serpent-dragon. Its representation in medieval
Islamic astrology has been addressed in a number of studies, foremost
among which remains Hartner’s study demonstrating the inl uence of
the conceptualisation of the two “lunar nodes” (al-ҵuqdatāni) on Is-
lamic artisans46.
As seen in sources that pre-date the Islamic period, the crucial
aspect of al-jawzahar is that it consists of two uni xed nodes of the
Moon’s orbit rotating around the ecliptic or “points at which (the) two
[great] circles of the sphere intersect”47, in other words the two points
where the course of the Moon crosses the plane of the ecliptic from
south to north: the “head of the dragon” (raҴs al-tinnīn) is formed by
the ascending node of the Moon’s orbit, and, correspondingly, the “tail
of the dragon” (dhanab al-tinnīn) by the descending node (cf. [Khar-
eghat 1914: 126–128; MacKenzie 1964: 515]). h is associates it with
both solar and lunar eclipses; the latter were attributed to the occur-
rence of a conjunction, or opposition, of the Sun and Moon (New
Moon or Full Moon, respectively) in or near the lunar nodes.
h e signii cance accorded to the eclipse is rel ected in the bipartite
“dragon” who was seen as temporarily “devouring” the Sun and the
Moon at certain irregular intervals, and then “delivering” them —
since the two planets always appear to emerge unscathed from their
temporary eclipse by the “dragon.” h is non-Ptolemaic concept played
46 [Hartner 1938], and “Al-Djawzahar or al-Djawzahr” [EI2 II, 501b. Cf.: Öney
1969: 193–216; Otto-Dorn 1978–79: 125–36; Azarpay 1978: 363–374].
Dei nition of al-jawzahar in Abū ޏAbd Allāh Muতammand al-Khwārizmī’s
Mafātīḥ al-ҵUlūm, cited at er [Hartner 1938: 120].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
a prominent role in astrological associations whereby the two nodes
were treated as though they were real celestial bodies, in other words
extra, albeit invisible “planets,” or i ctitious nodes [Beck 2004: 161,
n. 29]. h ey were conceived as an eighth and a ninth planet, the only
dif erence between them and the original seven planets being that
contrary to the others their movement was westwards or “retrograde,”
rather than eastwards [Ibid: 161].
h e Ghaznavid and Ghūrid campaigns into India resulted not
only in the acquisition of extensive booty, but also brought schol-
ars, crat smen and a variety of artisans into the capital, Ghazna, who
transmitted in turn their own indigenous iconographies, so contribut-
ing perhaps to the dif usion of the iconography of al-jawzahar. h e
great Khwārazmian scholar Abū Rayতān Muতammad ibn Aতmad al-
Bīrūnī, known as “the Master” (al-Ustādh), who devoted more than
half of his extensive writings to astronomy and astrology, had accom-
panied sul৬ān Maতmūd ibn Sebuktigin (r. 389/999  — 421/1030),
possibly as oi cial astrologer, on several of his military campaigns to
Northwest India48. Here he got acquainted with Sanskrit and various
dialects as well as a wealth of knowledge on early eleventh-century life
in India which he elaborates in his Kitāb TaҴrīkh al-Hind (“Descrip-
tion of India”), completed upon his return to Ghazna in 421/1030
shortly at er the death of Maতmūd49.
In his Kitāb al-Tah īm li-awāҴil ṣināҵat al-tanjīm (“Book of
Instruction in the Elements of the Art of Astrology”), which he had
written the previous year, al-Bīrūnī refers to the two i ctitious nodes,
the eighth and a ninth planet, as knot (ҵuqda) and point of crossing
(majāz) [al-Bīrūnī 1934: 91–92]. In spite of his statement that “they
are not real planets,” the same author does however record the position
of the raҴs al-tinnīn and the dhanab al-tinnīn in the various astrological
tables included in his texts [Ibid: 255, 258]. Much earlier, in the work
On the Great Conjunctions, or the Aḥkām Taḥāwīl Sinī al-Mawālid,
48 Boilot, “al-Bīrūnī (Bērūnī), Abū ގl Rayতān Muতammad b. Aতmad” [EI2 I,
1136a].
Ibid.
the astrologer Abū Maޏshar (d. 272/886) had already referred to the
points of exaltation for the nodes of the Moon which for the dragon’s
head is in Gemini 3°, and for the tail in Sagittarius 3°50.
h e “node of the Moon’s orbit” however is an integral part of
the iconography of the eclipse monster, portrayed as loop or twisted
knot, sometimes visualised as a pretzelor heart-shaped knot. h is
is rel ected in the symbolism of the personii cation of comets, Ketu,
visualised on the navagraha reliefs representing “the nine seizers”
that represent the nine Indian planetary deities of Vedic astrology,
similarly illustrated with a human torso and a serpentine tail termi-
nating in a knot51. h e earliest surviving representation of Rāhu and
Ketu in India is carved on a navagraha lintel from Uttar Pradesh,
dating from c. 600 or slightly later, in which Ketu is represented as
a half-ophidian i gure sitting on his coiled serpentine tail beside the
cephalic Rāhu (i g. 1)52.
Individual depictions of jawzahar — Draco as eighth planet next
to the seven traditional planets, comprising the Sun, the Moon, Sat-
urn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury53, ot en portray a cross-legged
[Hartner 1938: 133, n. 30] refers to De magnis coniunctionibus, the Latin
version translated by Johannes Hispalensis, printed at Augsburg in 1489
(repr. ed. Venice, 1515), which contains a chapter dealing with the plan-
etary inl uence of the nodes as a i gure of the “dragon” with its head and
tail twisted around two nodes, reproduced in [Ibid, i g. 10]. Cf. al-Bīrūnī’s
references in his Kitāb al-Tah īm [al-Bīrūnī 1934: 358].
Ketu’s serpent tail is alluded to in the Agnipurāṇa; see [De Mallmann
1962: 86].
h e earliest western Indian representation is found on a fragmentary lin-
tel from Alwar district in Rajasthan, which probably dates from c. 600 to
650 [Markel 1995, i g. 29]; Government Museum, Alwar). For later de-
pictions, see also [Hartner 1938: 134, 138, i gs. 6–8]. For a discussion of
the navagraha reliefs, see [Pingree 1964–5: 249–267; Markel 1995: 19–68
and 129–176].
[Hartner 1938: 114–138]. In later mediaeval Indian literature both nodes,
Rāhu, or raҴs al-tinnīn, and Ketu, or ḍanab al-tinnīn, were attributed the
same importance as the original planetary heptad, hence there were a total
of nine planets [Hartner 1938: 133, also 151].

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
i gure holding a serpent-dragon in each
hand. h e i gure is shown to hold either
a pair of upright serpent-dragons, their
bodies forming a  loop54, or vertical
staf s (i gs. 2–5); both, the coiling bod-
ies or the allegorical staf s, ending in
confronted dragonheads with gaping
snouts. It is signii cant that represen-
tations of the planet jawzahar thereby
make use of the emblematic portrayal
54 For instance, on a late twelt h — or early thirteenth-century copper al-
loy inkwell, inlaid with silver from Western Central Asia/Eastern Iranian
world [Пугаченкова, Ремпель 1982: i g. 196, i g. 197, line drawing], or on
a thirteenth-century silver-inlaid copper alloy candlestick from Mesopota-
mia [Baer 1983: 256, i g. 208].
Fig. 1
Nine planetary deities including
Rāhu and Ketu. Relief carving,
Uttar Pradesh. c. 600 or slightly
later. Red sandstone.
Height 11.4 cm, length 76.2 cm.
Collection of Paul F. Walter;
on loan to the Los Angeles County
Museum of Art, inv. no. L.93.14.24.
[Markel 1995: i g. 21]
Fig. 2
h e planet jawzahar.
Detail from the “Vaso Vescovali,” lidded
bowl, possibly Herat. c. 1200. Copper
alloy, silver inlay. Height 21.5 cm.
London, British Museum,
inv. no. ME OA 1950.7–25.1.
[Hartner 1973–74: i g. 17.6 (detail of
drawing; at er Lanci, M., Trattato delle
simboliche rappresentanze arabiche I–III,
Paris, 1845–46, pl. III)]
Fig. 3
“A ruler on a dragon-throne”.
Detail from the Bobrinski bucket,
possibly Herat. Muarram 559/
December 1163. By Muḥammad
ibn ޏAbd al-Wāid and Masޏūd ibn
Amad. Copper alloy, inlay in silver,
copper and niello.
Height to rim 18.5 cm, diameter
22 cm.
St. Petersburg, State Hermitage
Museum, inv. no. JR-2268.
Photograph by courtesy
of the State Hermitage Museum,
St. Petersburg
Fig. 4
“A ruler on a dragon-throne”.
Detail on the base of an inkwell,
Western Central Asia. Late twelt h
or early thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, silver inlay.
Formerly in the Minassian Collection,
present owner unknown.

## [Baer 1981: i g. 3A, and 1983, p. 261:

i g. 212a]
Fig. 5
“A ruler on a dragon-throne”.
Detail on the base of an inkwell,
Western Central Asia.
Late twelt h or early thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, silver inlay.
Location unknown.
[Пугаченкова, Ремпель 1982: i g. 196]

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
of the cosmic ruler, framed by dragon-headed staf s, ubiquitously em-
ployed on visual art from the mid-eleventh to early thirteenth century
and associated with the ancient concept of the “Master of the Drag-
ons.” h e choice of this cosmic symbolism underlines the prominence
accorded to jawzahar which gives an indication of the magnitude of the
potential ef ects the planet could have on the course of human events.
h e conception of the central i gure as dragon-tamer thereby perhaps
rel ects the apparent necessity to harness the forces.
In the Irano-Turkish territories, the eclipse pseudo-planet (al-
jawzahar) is ot en shown at the point of exaltation of its head or tail in
Gemini, as for instance on a silverand copper-inlaid brass ewer from
Herat, formerly in the Nuhad Es-Said Collection, now in the National
Museum of Qatar (i g. 6). In Islamic tradition, the planetary eclipse in
Sagittarius is generally rendered as a centaur taking aim with a bow at
its long dragon-headed tail and shooting an arrow into the dragon’s
mouth. On the Qatar ewer the sign is accordingly portrayed as the
protome of a winged quadruped dragon with tongue protruding from
the gaping mouth rising from the looped tail (i g. 7).
A sculptural example of the planetary eclipse in Sagittarius is de-
picted among eight astrological reliefs carved onto the pillars of the
Tigris bridge, near the city of Jazīrat ibn ޏUmar (present-day Cizre),
Anatolia. Among the reliefs is the upright knotted protome of a drag-
on with gaping mouth and curled-up snout tip, oriented towards the
i gure of a centaur shooting with a bow and arrow into its mouth
(i g. 8). h e bridge was commissioned by the wazīr of Mosul, Jamāl al-
Dīn Muতammad al-Iৢfahānī. h e wazīr’s imprisonment in 558/1163
provides a terminus ante quem for the construction of the bridge and
its astrological relief sculptures55. As pointed out by Hartner, the
[Meinecke, 1996: 60]. On the reliefs of Jazīrat ibn ޏUmar, see [Preusser,
1911, pl. 40; Hartner 1938: 134, i g. 2 (photograph at bottom let ), and
Hartner 1973–74: 108, 110; Gierlichs, 1996, pl. 47.4]. A comparable i g-
ure is represented as centaur-archer shooting an arrow backwards at the
dragon head emerging from its tail on the coinage of the Artuqid ruler of
Mardin, Nāৢir al-Dīn Artuq Arslan ibn Il Ghāzī (599/1203 — 637/1239)
[Roxburgh 2004: 398, cat. no. 86; Ş entü rk and Topraktepe 2009: 102;
Fig. 6
Sign of the zodiac featuring
the eclipse pseudo-planet
(al-jawzahar) at the points
of exaltation of its head or tail
in Gemini.
Detail from the body
of a ewer, possibly Herat.
Late twelt h or early
thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, inlay in silver,
copper and probably niello.
Height 44.5 cm.
Formerly in the Nuhad Es-Said
Collection, now in the National
Museum of Qatar in Doha.
Photograph by courtesy
of James Allan
Fig. 7
Sign of the zodiac featuring
the planetary eclipse in Sagittarius
shown as dragon-tailed centaur.
Detail from the body of a ewer,
possibly Herat.
Late twelt h or early
thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, inlay in silver,
copper and probably niello.
Height 44.5 cm.
Formerly in the Nuhad Es-Said
Collection, now in the National
Museum of Qatar in Doha.
Photograph by courtesy
of James Allan

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
reliefs are one of the earliest-known sculptural
examples “in which the Islamic artist obvi-
ously grants the same rights to one or both of
these pseudo-planets as to the seven real ones,
while in India this had been the rule centuries
before” [Hartner 1938: 132].
Similarly, depictions of al-jawzahar menac-
ing the Sun and the Moon, or their respective
zodiacal animals, the lion and the crab, became
Hauptmann von Gladiss and von Folsach
2006: 107–108, i gs. 15, 16]. h e same emblem
also i gures on the coinage of the ޏAbbasid ca-
liph al-Nāৢir (577/1181 — 620/1223) [Haupt-
mann von Gladiss and von Folsach 2006: 107,
cat. no. 15].
Fig. 8
Relief carving of the
planetary eclipse in
Sagittarius with upright
knotted protome of
a dragon oriented
towards the i gure of
a centaur shooting with
a bow and arrow into its
mouth.
Pillars of the Tigris
Bridge, commissioned by
the wazīr of Mosul, Jamāl
al-Dīn Muḥammad
al-Ifahānī.
Near the city of Jazīrat
ibn ޏUmar (present-day
Cizre), Anatolia.
[Gierlichs 1996, pl. 47.4]
Fig. 9
Sign of the zodiac
featuring the planetary
eclipse (al-jawzahar)
threatening
the Sun in Leo.
Detail from the body
of a ewer, possibly Herat.
Late twelt h or early
thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, inlay
in silver, copper and
probably niello.
Height 44.5 cm.
Formerly in the Nuhad
Es-Said Collection, now
in the National Museum
of Qatar in Doha.
Photograph by courtesy
of James Allan
Fig. 10
Sign of the zodiac
featuring the planetary
eclipse (al-jawzahar)
threatening the Moon
in Cancer
Detail from the body
of a ewer, possibly Herat.
Late twelt h or early
thirteenth century.
Copper alloy, inlay
in silver, copper
and probably niello.
Height 44.5 cm.
Formerly in the Nuhad
Es-Said Collection, now
in the National Museum
of Qatar in Doha.
Photograph by courtesy
of James Allan

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
prevalent in the decorative programmes of objects, as evidenced in the
depictions on the same ewer (i gs. 9, 10). h e importance of the eclipse
pseudo-planet is such that most of the roundels on this ewer show the
signs of the zodiac and planets inhabited with monster heads with long
l oppy ears growing from scrolling tendrils that Hartner has identii ed
with “the dragon progeny threatening the luminaries or, vicariously,
their domicilia and exaltations” [Hartner 1959: 237–239, and Hartner
1973–74: 112, 118]. However, he has qualii ed the astrological interpre-
tation suggesting that “in all probability, various elements — astronomi-
cal, astrological and mythological — were here fused in one” [Hartner
1973–74: 112–113]. Hence the astrological veracity of such details was
less important than their exemplary signii cance.
From about the twelt h century symbolic personii cations of Sol
and Luna, ot en shown together with the dragon motif, were widely
applied to portable objects, especially on metalwork, from Western
Central Asia, especially the greater Khurasan region. By virtue of
its very characteristic as an eclipse dragon al-jawzahar was directly
linked to the Sun and the Moon. h e two luminaries are among the
representations of the eight planets (the pseudo-planet jawzahar is
here represented as eighth “planet”) on the lid of a covered copper al-
loy bowl, known as Vaso Vescovali, made in the Khurāsān region at
about 1200 (cf. [Hartner 1973–74: 119. Ward, 1993: 79]). A three-
faced Sun, akin to the one featured on the Qatar ewer (i g. 9), sur-
mounts a winged i gure that sits on a pointed support and holds up
the luminary’s “dais”, and, in turn, is symmetrically l anked by two
confronted attendants behind whom long-eared jawzahar-like heads
grow out of curling foliage which curves around their waists (i g. 11).
h e Moon consists of a human i gure holding up with its four arms
(an image probably informed by Indian prototypes) a large crescent
that frames the entire upper body, while squatting on a “dais” sup-
ported by quadruped protomes, probably horses. h e addorsed attend-
ants are related to those of the Sun but are clad in more angular attire
with the jawzahar-like heads growing out of their waists (i g. 12 a and
b). Signii cantly, as Hartner has observed, “the scene has no menacing
character” [Hartner 1973–74: 119].
Fig. 11
Sign of the zodiac
featuring the Sun.
Detail from the “Vaso
Vescovali,” lidded bowl,
possibly Herat.
c. 1200. Copper alloy, silver
inlay. Height 21.5 cm.
London, British Museum,
inv. no. ME OA 1950.7–
25.1.
[Hartner 1973–74: i g. 17.1
and 17.2 (detail of drawing;
at er Lanci, M., Trattato
delle simboliche rappresen-
tanze arabiche I–III, Paris,
1845–46, pl. III)]
Fig. 12 a and b
Sign of the zodiac featuring the Moon.
Detail from the “Vaso Vescovali,” lidded bowl, possibly
Herat. c. 1200. Copper alloy, silver inlay. Height 21.5 cm.
London, British Museum, inv. no. ME OA 1950.7–25.1.
[Hartner 1973–74: i g. 17.1 and 17.2 (detail of drawing;
at er Lanci, M., Trattato delle simboliche rappresentanze
arabiche I–III, Paris, 1845–46, pl. III)]

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
h e personii cations of the Sun and the Moon are also featured
above a pair of addorsed knotted dragons, serving here as support for
the luminaries, as part of a decorative programme on a large copper al-
loy basin inlaid with silver of the thirteenth-century atābak Badr al-Dīn
Luގluގ (r. 618/1222 — 657/1259) of Mosul (i g. 13)56. h e depictions
reveal an interest in the translating of entities beyond the domain of
humankind, such as the two luminaries, into human guise [Pancaroğlu
2000: 197]. h e selective visualisation of the Sun and the Moon and the
menace posed to them in the form of solar and lunar eclipses, ascribed
to al-jawzahar, is related to the daily relevance af orded to the two lumi-
naries in human af airs and existence [Eadem: 204].
While the dragon is mainly associated with the eclipses and,
hence, the “devouring of light,” its positive aspect as giver of light
and, consequently, as protector of light is ot en more dii cult to gauge
although references are found in Iranian poetry. h e metaphysical
aspect of the dragon is evoked in a passage of the fables and anecdotes of
Cf. [Saxl 1912: 164 and i g. 10; Sarre and van Berchem 1907: 22, 27, i gs. 1, 13].
the early thirteenth-century Marzubān-nāma (“Tales of Marzubān”)
recorded by Saޏd al-Dīn Warāwīnī in 607–622/1210–1225, who
presented his collection to Abu ’l-Qāsim Rabīb al-Dīn, the vizier to
the Ildenizid/Eldiguzid atābeg of Azerbaijan (Ādharbyjān), Özbek

## ibn Muতammad, with the allegorical allusion:

...at dawn, when the black serpent of night cast the Sun’s disc
out of the mouth of the East57,
hence implying a double-headed dragon delivering the luminary and
the creation of light.
Reminiscences of ancient cosmogonical notions may be gauged
from Armenian lore recorded by the Armenian historian Moses of
Chorene (Movsēs Khorenatsi) in his Patmutҵiwn Hayocҵ (“History of
the Armenians”)58, relating to the Median king Astyages, the Arme-
nian arch-enemy referred to as Azhi Dahāka/Azhdahāk, the dragon
in man-shape (or the human in dragon-shape)59 of the Sasanian epics,
the archetype of evil misrule, whose i rst wife, Anoysh, was called the
“mother of the dragons” [Mahé 1995: 183]. Her name, Anoysh, how-
ever literally signii es “immortal, luminous, perfumed”60. Moreover,
her association with the monstrous dragon, to whom she gives numer-
ous of spring, recalls certain cosmogonies in which one of the two
primordial entities is “ini nite light, serene and joyous” and the other
“a frightening and dark obscurity, coiled up in twisting spirals akin
to those of a serpent”61. In this context it is interesting to recall that
Trans. [Levy 1959: 51].
h e Patmutҵiwn Hayocҵ is ostensibly written in the i t h century but prob-
ably dated to the mid-eighth century in its present form.
Cf. [Schwartz 1980: 123–124]. As has been suggested, the mythological
character of Azhdahāk may well be older than the Zoroastrian texts that
i rst recorded his name, since i gures of anthropomorphised dragons
already appear in Bronze Age Central Asia. See [Kuehn 2009: 43–47].
60 Acaryan, H., Hayeren armatakan bararan (“Dictionnaire étymologique
arménien”), vol. 1: 206 b (in Armenian), cited by [Mahé 1995: 183].
Poimandres, trans. and ed. [Nock and Festugière 1946: 7 and 12, n. 9].
Fig. 13
Sol and Luna above a pair of addorsed
winged regardant dragons.
Detail from a basin of the atābeg
Badr al-Dīn LuގluҴ, Mosul.
618/1222–657/1259. Copper alloy, silver
inlay. Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek.
[Saxl 1912, p. 164: i g. 10 (line drawing)]

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
in a parallel and related manner the original meaning of the Sanskrit
word ketu  — in apparent contradistinction to the light-devouring
function of Ketu as eclipse demon — is “light,” “clarity” (synonymous
with the etymologically-related adjective citra of the Pahlavī gōchihr)
[Hartner 1938: 152–153].
List of abbreviations
EI2 h e Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition, 11 vols. Leiden, 1960–2005 (Extract
r om h e Encyclopaedia of Islam CD–ROM v.–1.0).
EI3 h e Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3rd edition. Leiden, 2012 (Brill Online Reference Works).
EIr Encyclopaedia Iranica Online: http://www.iranica.com/newsite/ Accessed
March 2016.
Bibliography
Пугаченкова, Ремпель 1982  — Пугаченкова Г.А., Ремпель Л.И. Очерки
искусства Средней Азии. М., 1982.
Allen 1982  — Allen J.W. Islamic Metalwork: h e Nuhad Es-Said Collection.
London: Sotheby, 1982. Repr. ed. 1999.
Aśvaghoৢa — Aśvaghoৢa’s Buddhacarita or Acts of the Buddha: Complete San-
skrit Text with English Translation. Cantos I to XIV Translated from the
Original Sanskrit Supplemented by the Tibetan Version Together with an In-
troduction and Notes, trans. E.H. Johnston. Lahore, 1936. Repr. ed. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 2004.
Atharvaveda — h e Hymns of the Atharvaveda / Trans. R.T.H. Grii th, 2 vols.
London, 1895–96. Reprint ed., Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 66, Varanasi:
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Oi ce, 1968.
Azarpay 1978 — Azarpay G. h e Eclipse Dragon on an Arabic Frontispiece Min-
iature // Journal of American Oriental Society, 88, 4, 1978.
Baer 1983 — Baer E. Metalwork in Medieval Islamic Art. Albany: State Univer-
sity of New York Press, 1983.
Beck 2004 — Beck R. Beck on Mithraism: Collected Works with New Essays.
Ashgate Contemporary h inkers on Religion: Collected Works. Aldershot,
Hants: Ashgate, 2004.
Billard 1972  — Billard R. L’astronomie indienne. Investigation des textes
sanskrits et des données numé riques. Publications de l’É cole Franç aise
d’Extrê me-Orient 83. Paris: Ecole franç aise d’Extrê me-Orient, 1972.
al-Bīrūnī 1887 — al-Bīrūnī, Abū Ҵl-Reyḥān Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad. Kitāb fī
Taতqīq mā li-l-Hind min maqūla maqbūla i -l-ޏaql aw mardhūla / Trans. and
ed. E.C. Sachau, Alberuni’s India: An Account of the Religion, Philosophy,
Literature, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws and Astrology of India
about A.D. 1030. London: Trubner, 1887. Repr. ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 2012.
al-Bīrūnī 1934 — al-Bīrūnī, Abū Ҵl-Reyḥān Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad Kitāb al-
Tah īm li-Awaīގl ৡināޏat al-Tanjīm / Trans. and ed. R.R. Wright, h e Book
of Instruction in the Elements of the Art of Astrology. Repr. ed. from British
Museum Ms. Or. 8349, London: Luzac & Co, 1934.
Carter 1974 — Carter M.L. Royal Festal h emes in Sasanian Silverwork and
their Central Asian Parallels // Acta Iranica, Commemoration Cyrus. Vol. 1,
Hommage Universel, Tehran, Liege and Leiden, 1974.
Christensen 1944  — Christensen A. L’Iran sous les Sassanides. Copenhagen:
E. Munksgaard, 1944.
Cowell 1895 — Cowell E.B. h e Jā taka; or, Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895. Repr. ed. Delhi: Book Faith
India: Distributed by Pilgrims Book House, 2000.
Duchesne-Guillemin 1990 — Duchesne-Guillemin J. h e Dragon and the Lunar
Nodes // Bulletin of the Asia Institute, 4, 1990.
Epstein 1997 — Epstein M.M. Dreams of Subversion in Medieval Jewish Art and
Literature. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997.
Gail 1980 — Gail A.J. Planets and Pseudoplanets in Indian Literature and Art
with Special Reference to Nepal // East and West 30, 1/4, 1980.
Gierlichs 1996  — Gierlichs J. Mittelalterliche Tierreliefs in Anatolien und
Mesopotamien: Untersuchungen zur i gürlichen Baudekoration der Selds-
chuken, Artuqiden und ihrer Nachfolger bis ins 15. Jahrhundert. Istanbuler
Forschungen 42, Tübingen: E. Wasmuth, 1996.
Green 1992 — Green T.M. h e City of the Moon God: Religious Traditions of
Harran. Leiden: Brill, 1992.
Gutas 1998  — Gutas D. Greek h ought, Arabic Culture: the Graeco-Arabic
Translation Movement in Baghdad and Early Society (2nd–4th/8th–10th
Centuries). London and New York: Routledge, 1998.
Hartner 1938  — Hartner W. Pseudoplanetary Nodes of the Moon’s Orbit in
Hindu and Islamic Iconographies // Ars Islamica 5, 2, 1938.
Hartner 1959 — Hartner W. Zur astrologischen Symbolik des “Wade Cup” //
Aus der Welt der islamischen Kunst. Festschrit fü r Ernst Kü hnel zum 75.
Geburtstag am 26. 10. 1957, ed. R. Ettinghausen, Berlin: Gebr. Mann, 1959.
Hartner 1973–74 — Hartner W. h e Vaso Vescovali in the British Museum //
Kunst des Orients 9, 1/2, 1973–74.
Hauptmann von Gladiss and von Folsach 2006 — Hauptmann von Gladiss,
Almut, and von Folsach, Kjeld (eds). Die Dschazira: Kulturlandschat zwis-

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
chen Euphrat und Tigris. Berlin: Museum fü r Islamische Kunst, Staatliche
Museen zu Berlin, 2006.
Henning 1942 — Henning W.B. An Astronomical Chapter of the Bundahishn //
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland (New Series),
74, 3–4, 1942.
Hermes Trismegistus — Poimandres, Traites 1–12 / Trans. and ed. A.D. Nock and
A.J. Festugière // Corpus hermeticum. Vol. 1, 4. Paris: Socié té d‘é dition “Les
Belles lettres”, 1946.
Herzfeld 1920 — Herzfeld E. Der h ron des Khosro. Quellenkritische und ikonog-
raphische Studien uber Grenzgebiete des Kunstgeschichte des Morgenund
Abendlandes // Jahrbuch der Preussischen Kunstsammlungen, 41, 1920.
Hoernle 1894 — Hoernle A.F.R. h e Weber MSS — Another Collection of An-
cient Manuscripts from Central Asia // Journal of the Asiatic Society of Ben-
gal. 62, pt. 1, Calcutta, 1894.
Hoernle 1893–1912 — Hoernle A.F.R. The Bower Manuscript. Facsimile Leaves,
Nagari Transcript, Romanised Transliteration and English Translation with
Notes. Calcutta: Superintendent Government Printing, 1893–1912.
Janda 2010 — Janda M. Die Musik nach dem Chaos: Der Schöpfungsmythos der
europäischen Vorzeit. Innsbrucker Beitrage zur Kulturwissenschat , N.F. 1,
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität Innsbruck,
Bereich Sprachwissenschat , 2010.
Kane 1958 — Kane P.V. History of Dharmaś ā stra (Ancient and Mediaeval Reli-
gious and Civil Law). Vol. 5, 1. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti-
tute, 1958. Repr. ed. 1974.
Kay Kāwūs ibn Iskandar ibn Qābūs  — Kay Kāwūs ibn Iskandar ibn Qābūs,
ҵUnṣur al-Maҵālī A Mirror for Princes: h e Qābūs Nāma by Kai Kā’ūs ibn
Iskandar, Prince of Gurgān / Trans. R. Levy, London: Cresset Press, 1951.
Kennedy 1956 — Kennedy E.S. A Survey of Islamic Astronomical Tables. Trans-
actions of the American Philosophical Society. New Ser., 46, 2. Philadelphia:
American Philosophical Society, 1956.
Kennedy and Pingree 1971 — Kennedy E.S., and Pingree D.E. h e Astrological
History of Mashāގallāh. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971.
Khareghat 1914 — Khareghat M.P. h e Identity of Some Heavenly Bodies men-
tioned in Old Iranian Writings // Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Madressa Jubilee
Volume, ed. J.J. Modi, Bombay, 1914.
Kuehn 2009 — Kuehn S. On the Role of the Ophidian and the Quadruped Dragon
within the Iconography of the Mythological Scheme of the Oxus Civilisation //
On the Track of Uncovering a Civilization. A Volume in Honor of the 80th
Anniversary of Victor Sarianidi. Transactions of the Margiana Archaeological
Expedition. Vol. 3, Moscow and St. Petersburg: Aletya, 2009.
Kuehn 2011 — Kuehn S. h e Dragon in Medieval East Christian and Islamic Art.
Islamic History and Civilization. Studies and Texts 86. Brill: Leiden and Boston.
Levi 1915 — Levi S. Le catalogue géographique des Yakৢa dans la Mahâmâyûrî //
Journal asiatique, 11ͤ série, 5. 1915.
L’Orange 1953 — L’Orange H.P. Studies on the Iconography of Cosmic King-
ship in the Ancient World. Instituttet for sammenlignende kulturforskning,
Serie A, Forelesninger XXIII, Oslo: Aschehoug, 1953.
Long 1976 — Long B.J. Life Out of Death: A Structural Analysis of the Myth of
the ‘Churning of the Ocean of Milk’ // Hinduism, New Essays in the His-
tory of Religions, Studies in the History of Religions, ed. Bardwell Smith, L.,
Supplement to Numen 33. Leiden: Brill, 1976.
MacKenzie 1964 — MacKenzie D.N. Zoroastrian Astrology in the Bundahišn //
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 27, 1964.
Mahé 1995 — Mahé J-P. Dragons et serpents dans les traditions arménienne //
Actes du colloque “Les Lusignans et l’OutreMer”, 20–24 Octobre 1993. Poi-
tiers, 1995.
De Mallmann 1962 — De Mallmann M.-h . Les enseignements iconographiques
de l’Agni-purāna. Annales du Musée Guimet, Bibliothèque d’études 67. Par-
is: Presses universitaires de France, 1962.
Markel 1990 — Markel S.A. h e Imagery and Iconographic Development of the
Indian Planetary Deities Rāhu and Ketu // South Asian Studies, 6, 1, 1990.
Markel 1995 — Markel S.A. Origins of the Nine Planetary Deities. Studies in
Asian h ought and Religion. Vol. 16, Lewiston, NY, 1995.
Meinecke 1996 — Meinecke M. Patterns of Stylistic Changes in Islamic Archi-
tecture: Local Traditions Versus Migrating Artists. New York: New York
University Press, 1996.
Mohl, J. (Trans. and ed). Le livre des rois. 7 vols. Paris: J. Maisonneuve, 19, 1838–78.
Öney 1969 — Öney G. Anadolu Selçuk sanatlında Ejder Figürleri (Dragon Figures
in Anatolian Seljuk Art) // Belleten 33, 1969.
Otto-Dorn 1978–79 — Otto-Dorn, K. Figural Stone Reliefs on Seljuk Sacred Ar-
chitecture in Anatolia // Kunst des Orients, 12, 1–2, 1978–79.
Pancaroğlu 2000 — Pancaroğlu O. ‘A World unto Himself’: h e Rise of a New
Human Image in the Late Seljuq Period (1150–1250). Doctoral dissertation,
Harvard University, 2000.
Pingree 1963 — Pingree D.E. Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran // Isis, 54,
1963.
Pingree 1968 — Pingree D.E. h e h ousands of Abū Ma’shar. London: h e War-
burg Institute, 1968.
Pingree 1970 — Pingree D.E. Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit. Philadel-
phia: American Philosophical Society, Memoirs of the American Philosophi-
cal Society, 1970.
Pingree 2006 — Pingree D.E. h e Byzantine Translations of Māšāގallāh on In-
terrogational Astrology // h e Occult Sciences in Byzantium / Eds. P. Mag-
dalino and M.V. Mavroudi. Geneva: La Pomme d‘or, 2006.

Sara Kuehn
The Eclipse Demons Ra¯hu and Ketu in Islamic Astral Sciences
Preusser 1911 — Preusser C. Nordmesopotamische Baudenkmäler altchristlicher
und islamischer Zeit. Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs, 1911.
৙gveda — h e Hymns of the Rigveda / Trans. Grii th, Ralph h omas Hotch-
kin. 2 vols. London, 1892. Reprint ed., Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 35,
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Oi ce, 1963.
Roxburgh 2005 — Roxburgh D (ed). Turks: A Journey of a Thousand Years,
600–1600. London: Royal Academy of Arts, 2005.
Russell 2004 — Russell J.R. Armenian and Iranian Studies. Harvard Armenian
Texts and Studies 9. Armenian Heritage Press, Cambridge, MA: Department
of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations, Harvard University, 2004.
Sacred Books of the East — Sacred Books of the East / Trans. E.W. West, vol. 5,
Oxford, 1880.
Saliba 1992 — Saliba G. h e Role of the Astrologer in Medieval Islamic Society //
Bulletin d’Études Orientales, 44, 1992.
Santoro 2006 — Santoro A. On the Two Intertwined Dragons from Pendžikent //
Ērān ud Anērān: Studies Presented to Boris Il’ich Maršak on the Occasion of
His 70th Birthday / Eds. M. Compareti , P. Raf etta and G. Scarcia. Venice:
Cafoscarina, 2006.
Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna of the Divyāvadāna  — Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna of the
Divyāvadāna, trans. Mukhopadhyaya S. Santiniketan: Ṿiś vabharati, 1954.
Sarre and van Berchem 1907 — Sarre F. and van Berchem M. Das Metalbecken
des Atabeks Lulu von Mosul in der Kgl. Bibliothek zu München // München-
er Jahrbuch der bildenden Kunst, I, 1907.
Savage-Smith 2004 — Savage-Smith E. Introduction // Magic and Divination
in Early Islam / Ed. E. Savage-Smith. Aldershot, Hants and Burlington, VT:
Ashgate/Variorum, 2004.
Saxl 1912 — Saxl F. Beiträge zu einer Geschichte der Planetendarstellungen im
Orient und Okzident // Der Islam 3, 1912.
Scherer 1953 — Scherer A. Gestirnnamen bei den indogermanischen Völkern.
Heidelberg: Winter, 1953.
Schwartz 1980 — Schwartz M. Mayrhofer, M., Iranisches Personennamenbuch,
Band I: Die altiranischen Namen. Faszikel 1: Die avestischen Namen // Ori-
entalia 49, n.s., Pontii cium Institutum Biblicum, 1980.
Ş entü rk and Topraktepe 2009  — Ş entü rk Ş ., Topraktepe E. What the Coins
Tell Us: Symbols and Multicultural Aspects in Medieval Anatolian Coins.
30 September to 31 December 2009. Yapı Kredi Vedat Nedim Tor Museum.
Istanbul: YKY, 2009.
Sezgin 1971 — Sezgin F. Alchimie-Chemie-Botanik-Agrikultur bis ca. 430 H.,
Geschichte des arabischen Schrit tums. Vol. 4. Leiden: Brill, 1971.
Strong 1992 — Strong J.S. Legend and Cult of Upagupta: Sanskrit Buddhism in
North India and Southeast Asia. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1992.
Suhrawardī — al-Suhrawardī, Shihābuddīn Ya ḥyā. h e Mystical and Visionary Trea-
tises of Suhrawardi. Trans. W.M. h ackston, London: Octagon Press, 1982.
al-h aޏālibī — al-h aҵālibī, Abū Manṣūr. TaҴrīkh Ghurar al-siyar or al-Ghurar fī
siyar al-mulūk wa ’l-akhbārihim. Trans. and ed. H. Zotenberg // Histoire des
rois des Perses par Abou Manৢour ޏAbd al-Malik ibn Muতammad ibn Ismaޏil
al-h aޏalibi. Paris: Imprimerie nationale, 1900.
Ullmann 1972 — Ullmann M. Die Naturund Geheimwissenschat en im Islam.
Handbuch der Orientalistik I, Ergänzungsband VI, 2, Leiden: Brill, 1972.
Van Bladel 2015 — Van Bladel K. Eighth-Century Indian Astronomy in the Two
Cities of Peace // Islamic Cultures, Islamic Contexts. Essays in Honor of Pro-
fessor Patricia Crone, / Eds. B. Sadeghi, A.Q. Ahmed, A.J. Silverstein and
R.G. Hoyland, Brill: Leiden and Boston, 2015.
Varā hamihira 1870–74  — Bṛhatsaṁhitā. Trans. and ed. H. Kern. h e B৚hat-
Saṅhitâ; Or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varâha-mihira  //
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, New Series,
4, 2, 1870: 430–79; 5, 1, 1870: 45–90; 5, 2, 1871: 231–88; 6, 1, 1873: 36–91;
6, 2, 1873: 279–338; and 7, 1, 1874: 81–134.
Varā hamihira 1947 — Bṛhatsaṁhitā. Trans. and ed. R. Bhat // Varahamihira’s
Brihat samhita. Bangalore: V.B. Soobbiah, 1947. Repr. ed. Delhi: Motilal Ba-
narasidass, 1981.
Waldschmidt 1970 — Waldschmidt E. Buddha Frees the Disc of the Moon //
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 33, 1970.
Ward 1993 — Ward R. Islamic Metalwork. London: h ames and Hudson, 1993.
Williams 1982 — Williams J.G. h e Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982.
Zaehner 1955 — Zaehner R.Ch. Zurvan: A Zoroastrian Dilemma. Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1955. Repr. ed. New York: Biblio and Tannen, 1972.
Zaehner 1956 — Zaehner, R.Ch. h e Teachings of the Magi: A Compendium of
Zoroastrian Beliefs. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., New York: Mac-
millan. Repr. ed. 1975.
Zimmer 1936 — Zimmer H.R. Maya; der indische Mythos. Stuttgart: Deutsche
Verlags-Anstalt, 1936. Repr. ed. Frankfurt: Insel-Verlag 1978.
Zürcher 1959 — Zürcher E. h e Buddhist Conquest of China: h e Spread and
Adaptation of Buddhism in Early Medieval China. Vol. 1. Leiden: Brill, 1959.